# 5 Structs

A _struct_ or _structure_ is a custom data type that lets you package together
and name multiple related values that make up a meaningful group.
OOP: _struct_ is like an object's data attributes.
In this chapter...
- compare / contrast tuples with structs to build on what you already know and
    demonstrate when structs are a better way to group data.

- How to define / instantiate structs
- How to define associated functions, especially _methods_, to specify behavior
    associated with a struct type.
- Structs, Enums (Ch 6) are the building blocks for creating new types in the
    program's domain to take full advantage of Rust's compile-time type checking

# 5_1 Defining and Instantiating Structs
- Struct (구조체)는 Tuple과 비슷하다 - 두 타입 모두 여러 값 (서로 관련있는)을
    하나로 묶는다.
  - 튜플처럼, struct의 각 필드는 타입이 다를 수 있다.
  - 튜플과 달리, struct의 각 필드는 이름을 가진다.
    - 즉 tuple에서 각 데이터에 접근할 때 순서 (index)에 의존해야 하는 것과 달리
        각 데이터에 접근할 때 이름을 사용하면 되므로 더욱 유연하다.

- Defining struct Example)
```rust
struct StructName {
    field_name_1: type_1,
    ...
}
```

- Instantiating struct
  - State the name of the struct; add curly brackets containing k-v pairs.
  - We don't have to specify the fields in the same order.
- Instantiating struct Example)
```rust
let struct_name = StructName {
    field_name_1: value_1,
    ...
};
```

- To get a specific value from a struct:
  - `struct_name.field_name_1`
  - If an instance is mutable, we can change a value by using the dot notation
      and assigning into a particular field.
- To get a specific value from a struct Example)
```rust
let mut struct_name = StructName {
    field_name_1: value_1,
    ...
};
struct_name.field_name_1 = new_value_1;
```
- NOTE: Rust doesn't allow marking only certain fields as mutable; the entire
    instance must be mutable.
- As with any expression, we can construct a new instanc eof the struct as the
    laste expression in the function body to implicitly return that new instance.

- Function that returns a struct Example)
```rust
fn build_user(email: String, username: String) -> User {
    User {
        email: email,
        username: username,
        active: true,
        sign_in_count: 1,
    }
}
```
- Instantiating a struct with field init shorthand
  - If the parameter and the field have the same name, we can use the field init
      shorthand syntax.
```rust
fn build_user(email: String, username: String) -> User {
    User { // order doesn't matter
        active: true,
        email,
        username,
        sign_in_count: 1,
    }
}
```

## 5_1_1 Creating Instances from Other Instances with Struct Update Syntax
- We can use struct update syntax to use the fields of an existing instance to
    create a new instance.
  - Use `..` to specify that the remaining fields not explicitly set should have
      the same value as the fields in the given instance.
- Below two code snippets does the same thing.
```rust
let user2 = User {
    active: user1.active,
    email: String::from("another@example.com"),
    username: user1.username,
    sign_in_count: user1.sign_in_count,
};
```
```rust
let user2 = User {
    email: String::from("another@example.com"),
    ..user1
}
```
- NOTE: Struct update syntax uses assignment, so it moves the data. In this
    example (second snippet), we can no longer use `user1` because the `String`
    in the `username` field of `user1` has been moved to `user2`.
  - If we want to use `user1` again,
    - Explicitly `.clone()`.
    - Assign new values for both email and username.
      - Both `active` and `sign_in_count` are types that implement the `Copy` trait.

## 5_1_2 Using Tuple Structs without Named Fields to Create Different Types

- Tuple structs are useful when you want to give the whole tuple a name and
    make the tuple be a different type from other tuples.
- Tuple structs Example)
```rust
struct Color(i32, i32, i32);
struct Point(i32, i32, i32);

fn main() {
  let black = Color(0, 0, 0); // Color type
  let origin = Point(0, 0, 0); // Point type. Cannot be assigned to black.
}
```
- As we did for tuple, we can access each element with `.` followed by the
    index.

## 5_1_3 Unit-Like Structs Without Any Fields
- Unit-like structs are useful when you need to implement a trait on some type
    but don't have any data that you want to store in the type itself.
  - Unit-like structs behave similarly to `()`, the unit type.
  - More detail in Ch 10.
- Example)
```rust
struct UnitLikeStruct;
fn main() {
  let subject = UnitLikeStruct;
}
```

## 5_1_4 Ownership of Struct Data
- Previous examples used owned type like `String`.
- What if we replace with `&str` (in general, reference type)?
```rust
struct User {
    username: &str,
    email: &str,
    sign_in_count: u64,
    active: bool,
}
```
- This code won't compile, and compiler will say that it expected named lifetime
    parameter.
```rust
struct User<'a> {
    username: &'a str,
    email: &'a str,
    sign_in_count: u64,
    active: bool,
}
```
- Lifetime will be discussed in Ch 10.
  - LIfetimes ensure that the data referenced by a struct is valid for as long
      as the struct is.
