# 1_3

## Cargo

Rust's build system & package manager.

### Creating a project

```bash
cargo new <package-name>
```

Inside a git repo, git files won't be generated. To override, add `--vcs=git`.

### Cargo.toml

Basically it has `[package]` section and an empty `[dependencies]` section.

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_cargo"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2021"

[dependencies]
```

`[packages]` section is a section heading that indicates that the following
statements are configuring a package.
name, version, edition sets the configuration information Cargo needs to compile
the program - name, version, edition of rust.
`[dependencies]` is the start of a section to list any of the project's
dependencies.
- In Rust, packages of code are referred to as _crates_.

### `src` directory
`cargo new` initiates a "Hello, world!" program whose `main.rs` is in `src` directory.
Top level project directory is just for README files, license information,
config files, and anything else **NOT** related to the project's source code.
To convert `non-cargo` project to cargo project, just move the code into the
_src_ directory and create an appropriate _Cargo.toml_ file.

### Building and running a project

```bash
cargo build
```
This command creates an executable file in _target/debug/<package_name>_. That
executable file is already executable.

To build and run, use `cargo run`.

- `cargo check`: does not produce an executable file but checks to make sure it
    compiles.
  - To continually check the work while writing the code, using `cargo check`
      will speed up the process.

### Recap
- Create with `cargo new`
- Build with `cargo build`
- Run with `cargo run`
- Check with `cargo check`
- cargo stores executable in the _target/debug_ directory.

### Build for release
```bash
cargo build --release
```

### Cargo as Convention
Any rust crates that can be compiled with cargo should be built successfully
with following commands:
```bash
git clone ...
cd ...
cargo build
```
