# 6_1 Enum

- Ex) Defining shape: `Rectangle`, `Circle`, `Triangle`, etc
  - Rust allows us to encode these possibilities as an Enum.
- Ex) Ip address: `V4` address, `V6` address. Not both at the same time.
  - But both `V4` and `V6` are the same IP addresses, should be treated as the same type.
```rust
enum IpAddrKind {
    V4,
    V6,
}
```

## 6_1_1 Enum Values
- Creating instances of Enum: `EnumName::VariantName`
- Creating function parameter using Enum: `fn route(ip_kind: IpAddrKind) {}`
- Enum with struct:
```rust
enum IpAddrKind{
  V4,
  V6,
}
struct IpAddr {
  kind: IpAddrKind,
  address: String,
}
let home = IpAddr {
  kind: IpAddrKind::V4,
  address: String::from("127.0.0.1");
}
let loopback = IpAddr {
  kind: IpAddrKind::V6,
  address: String::from("::1");
}
```

- However, there is a more concise way (Advantage 1):
```rust
enum IpAddr {
  V4(String),
  V6(String),
}
let home = IpAddr::V4(String::from("127.0.0.1"));
let loopback = IpAddr::V6(String::from("::1"));
```
- Rust can attach data to each variant of the enum directly, so there is no need
    for an extra struct.
  - Note that, the name of each enum variant that we define also becomes a
      function that constructs an instance of the enum:
    - `IpAddr::V4()` is a function call that takes `String` argument and returns
        an instance of the `IpAddr` type.
- Each variant can have different types and amounts of associated data (Advantage 2):
```rust
enum IpAddr {
  V4(u8, u8, u8, u8),
  V6(String),
}
let home = IpAddr::V4(127, 0, 0, 1);
let loopback = IpAddr::V6(String::from("::1"));
```

- IP Address is so common that Rust already has its library `std::net::IpAddr`.
```rust
struct Ipv4Addr{
  // --snip--
}
struct Ipv6Addr {
  // --snip--
}
enum IpAddr {
  V4(Ipv4Addr),
  V6(Ipv6Addr),
}
```
  - From this code, we can see that we can put any kind of data inside an enum
      variant: strings, numeric types, or structs, even another enum.

- Another Example)
```rust
enum Message {
    Quit, // No data associated with.
    Move { x: i32, y: i32 }, // An anonymous struct.
    Write(String), // A single String.
    ChangeColor(i32, i32, i32), // Three i32 values.
}
```
- With struct definition:
```rust
struct QuitMessage; // Unit struct.
struct MoveMessage {
    x: i32,
    y: i32,
}
struct WriteMessage(String); // Tuple struct.
struct ChangeColorMessage(i32, i32, i32); // Tuple struct.
```
  - If we used the different structs, each of which has its own type, we
      couldn't as easily define a function to take any of these kinds of
      messages as we could with the `Message` enum defined before, which is a
      single type.

- Like structs, we are able to define methods on enums.
```rust
impl Message {
    fn call(&self) {
        // method body would be defined here
    }
}
let m = Message::Write(String::from("hello"));
m.call();
```

## 6_1_2 Option Enum and its advantages over null values

- `Option` type encodes the very common scenario: a value could be some or none.
  - Ex) Requesting the first element from a list: a value (if non-empty) or
      none(if empty).
    - Expressing this concept in terms of the type system means the compiler can
        check whether you have handled all the cases you should be handling;
        this functionality can prevent bugs that are extremely common in other
        programming languages.
- Rust doesn't have the null feature that many other languages have.
  - In languages with _null_, variables can always be in: null or not-null
      states.
- Tony Hoare says that Null References is his billion-dollar mistake.
- If you try to use a null value as a not-null value, you'll get an error of
    some kind.
- The concept that null is trying to express IS still a useful one: null is a
    value that is currently invalid or absent for some reason.

- So, Rust does not have nulls, but it does have an enum that can encode the
    concept of a value being present or absent. In the standard library, this
```rust
enum Option<T> {
  None,
  Some(T),
}
```
- `Option<T>` enum is so useful that it is even included in the prelude.
  - `Option::Some` and `Option::None` are also included.
  - `Option<T>` is still just a regular enum, and `Some(T)` and `None` are still
      variants of type `Option<T>`.
  - NOTE: `<T>` is a generic type parameter (Ch 10).
```rust
let some_number = Some(5); // Option<i32>
let some_char = Some('e'); // Option<char>
let absent_number: Option<i32> = None; // Option<i32>. The compiler cannot infer
                                       // the type from only None value.
                                       // When we have a `Some` value, we know
                                       // the value is present and its type.
                                       // When we have a `None` value, we don't
                                       // have a valid value, so we don't know
                                       // type.
```

- Why is having `Option<T>` anything better than having null?
  - Bevause `Option<T>` and `T` are different types, the compiler won't let use
      use an `Option<T>` value as if it were definitely a valid value.
```rust
let x: i8 = 5;
let y: Option<i8> = Some(5);

let sum = x + y; // Cannot add `Option<i8>` to i8. HELP: trait Add<Option<i8>>
                 // is not implemented for i8.
```

- You have to convert an `Option<T>` to a `T` before you can perform `T` operations
    with it.
  - This helps catch one of the most common issues with null: assuming that
      something is not null when it is actually null.
  - Eliminating the risk of incorrectly assuming a not-null value helps you to
      be more confident in the code.
    - In order to have a value that can possibly be null, must explicitly opt in
        by making the type of that value `Option<T>`.
    - When you use that value, you are required to explicitly handle the case
        when the value is null.
    - Everywhere that a value has a type that isn't an `Option<T>`, you can
        safely assume that the value isn't null.
- How to get the `T` value?
  - use `.unwrap()` (if clearly Some) or `.unwrap_or(default_value)` or
      `.unwrap_or_default()` (that returns default value of the type when null)

- `match` expression is a control flow construct that does just this when used
    with enums: it will run different code depending on which variant of the
    enum it has, and that code can use the data inside the matching value.
