# 6_3 Concise Control Flow with if let

- `if let` is useful in situations where the `match` expression is a bit wordy.
- `if let` lets you combine `if` and `let` into a less verbose way to handle
    values that match one pattern while ignoring the rest.
```rust
// 1.
    let config_max = Some(3u8);
    match config_max {
        Some(max) => println!("The maximum is configured to be {}", max),
        _ => (),
    }
// 2.
    let config_max = Some(3u8);
    if let Some(max) = config_max { // destructuring.
        println!("The maximum is configured to be {}", max);
    }
```

- `if let` takes a pattern and an expression separated by an equal sign (assign)
  - Like match, where the expression is given to `match` and the pattern is its first arm.
  - The code in the `if let` blcok isn't run if the value doesn't match.
- Using `if let` means less typing, less indentation, and less boilerplate code.
  - Lose the exhaustive checking that `match` enforces.
  - Tradeoff of gaining conciseness vs losing exhaustive checking.
  - Like a syntax sugar for a match that runs code when the value matches one pattern and then ignores all other values.

- We can include an `else` with an `if let`.
  - `else` block is the same as the block of code that would go with the `_`
      case in the match expression.
```rust
// 1.
    let mut count = 0;
    match coin {
        Coin::Quarter(state) => println!("State quarter from {:?}!", state),
        _ => count += 1,
    }
// 2.
    let mut count = 0;
    if let Coin::Quarter(state) = coin {
        println!("State quarter from {:?}!", state);
    } else {
        count += 1;
    }
```

- If you have a situation in which your program has logic that is too verbose to
    express using a `match`, remember `if let` is in the toolbox.

# Summary

- Covered how to use enums to create custom types that can be one of a set of
    enumerated values.
- The `Option<T>` enum and its `Some` and `None` variants have a number of uses:

- Your Rust programs can now express concepts in the domain using structs and
    enums.
- Creating custom types to use in the API ensures type safety.
- In order to provide a well-organized API to the users that is straightforward
    to use and only exposes exactly what your users will need, turn to modules.
