# Ownership

Rust's most unique feature and has deep implications for the rest of the
language.
Ownership enables Rust to make memory safety guarantees without needing a
garbage collector.
Ownership related features: borrowing, slices, and how Rust lays data out in
memory.

## 4_1 Ownership

_Ownership_ is a set of rules that govern how a Rust program manages memory.
All programs have to manage the way they use a computer's memory while running.
Some languages have garbage collection that regularly looks for no-longer-used
memory as the program runs; In other languages, the programmer must explicitly
allocate/free the memory.
Rust: memory is managed through a system of ownership with a set of rules that
the compiler checks.
If any of the rules are violated, the program won't compile.
None of the features of ownership will slow down the program.

The more experienced you become with Rust and the rules of the ownership system,
the easier you'll find it to naturally develop code that is safe and efficient.

### The Stack and the Heap

Many programming languages don't require to think about the stack/heap very
often. In a systems programming language like Rust, however, whether a value is
on the stack/heap affects how the language behaves and why we have to make
certain decisions.
Parts of ownership will be described in relation to the stack/heap later in this
chapter.

Stack: LIFO.
Heap: less organized. When you put data on the heap, you request a certain
amount of space. The memory allocator finds an empty spot in the heap that is
big enough, marks it as being in use, and returns a _pointer_, which is the
address of that location. (Called _allocating on the heap_)
Because the pointer to the heap is a known, fixed size, you can store the
pointer on the stack, but when you want the actual data, you have to follow the
pointer.

- Pushing to the stack is faster than allocating on the heap (allocator never
    has to search for a place to store new data.
  - Comparatively, allocating space on the heap requires more work because the
      allocator must first find a big enough space to hold the data and then
      perform bookkeeping to prepare for the next allocation.

- Accessing data in the heap is slower than stack because you have to follow a
    pointer to get there.

- When your code calls a function, the values passed into the function
    (including, potentially, pointers to data on the heap) and the function's
    local variables get pushed onto the stack. When the function is over, those
    values get popped off the stack.
- Keeping track of what parts of code are using what data on the heap,
    minimizing the amount of duplicate data on the heap, and cleaning up unused
    data on the heap so you don't run out of space are all problems that
    ownership addresses. Once you understand ownership, you won't need to think
    about the stack and the heap very often. In the meantime, knowing that the
    main purpose of ownership is to manage heap data can help explain why it
    works the way it does.

## 4_1 Ownership Rules

These rules are the basic, keep in mind.
- Each value in Rust has an owner.
- There can only be one owner at a time.
- When the owner goes out of scope, the value will be dropped.

### 4_1_1 Variable Scope
```rust
{                   // s is not valid here because it's not yet declared
  let s = "hello";  // s is valid from this point forward. When `s` comes
                    // _into_ scope, it is valid.
  // do stuff with s. It remains valid until it goes _out of scope_.
}                  // this scope is now over, and s is no longer valid
```

### 4_1_2 String Type
Strings are different from primitive / compound (of primitive) types. While
their size are known, can be stored on the stack, can be quickly/trivially
copied to make a new, independent instance, some types including String type are
stored on the heap. To knwo how Rust knows when to clean up that data, we will
use String Type for instance.

We will concentrate on the parts of `String` that relate to ownership. These
aspects also apply to other complex data types, whether they are provided by the
standard library or created by the user. `String` will be discussed in more
depth in Chapter 8.

- String literals are convenient but they aren't suitable for every situation in
    which we may want to use text.
  - String literals are immutable.
  - Not every string value can be known when we write our code (for instance:
      take user input and store).
- To handle, Rust has `String` type.
  - This type manages data allocated on the heap and as such is able to store an
      amount of text that is unknown to us at compile time.
  - ex) `let s = String::from("hello");` // :: operator allows us to namespace
      this particular `from` function under the `String` type.
  - ex)
  ```rust
  let mut s = String::from("hello");
  s.push_str(", world!"); // push_str() appends a literal to a String
  println!("{}", s); // This will print `hello, world!`
  ```
  - What's the difference here? Why can `String` be mutated but literals cannot?

## 4_2 Memory and allocation
In the case of a string literal, we know the contents at compile time. Text is
hardcoded directly into the final executable. This is why string literals are
fast and efficient. But these properties only come from the string literal's
immutability. Unfortunately, we can't put a blob of memory into the binary for
each piece of text whose size is unknown at compile time and whose size might
change while running the program.
With the `String` type, in order to support a mutable, growable piece of text,
we need to allocate an amount of memory on the heap, unknown at compile time, to
hold the contents. This means:
- The memory must be request from the memory allocator at runtime.
  - When we call `String::from`, its implementation requests the memory it
      needs. (Universal in programming languages)
- We need a way of returning this memory to the allocator when we're done with
    our `String`.
  - In languages with GC, GC keeps track of and cleans up memory that isn't
      being used anymore.
  - In languages without a GC (most cases), it's our responsibility to identify
      when memory is no longer being used and to call code to explicitly free
      it, just as we did to request it.
    - Doing this correctly has historically been a difficult programming
        problem.
    - If we forget to do, we'll waste the memory.
    - If we do it too early, we'll have an invalid variable.
    - If we do it twice, that's a bug too.
    - Need exactly one `allocate`/`free` pair.
  - Rust: memory is automatically returned once the variable that _owns_ it goes
      our of scope.
    - When a variable goes out of scope, Rust calls a special function for us,
        called `drop`, and it's where the author of the type can put the code to
        return the memory.
    - Rust calls `drop` automatically at the closing curly bracket.
    - NOTE: in C++, this pattern of deallocating resources (adding `free` always
        at the closing bracket) is called RAII (Resource Acquisition Is
        Initialization). The `drop` function in Rust will be familiar to you if
        you've used RAII patterns.
    - This pattern has a profound impact on the way Rust code is written.
    - May seem simple right now, but the behavior of code can be unexpected in
        more complicated situations when we want to have multiple variables use
        the data we've allocated on the heap.

## 4_3 Variables and Data Interacting with Move
Multiple variables can interact with the same data in different ways in Rust.
```rust
let x = 5; // bind 5 to x
let y = x; // copy of the value in x binds to y
```

```rust
let s1 = String::from("hello");
let s2 = s1; // copying value? Right?
```
- `s1` has a table: ptr to the string's index 0 in heap, length, capacity.
  - length: how much memory, in bytes(**important**), the contents of the
      `String` are currently using.
  - capacity: total amount of memory, in bytes, that the `String` has received
      from the allocator.
- `s2 = s1`: the `String` data is copied: copy the ptr, length, capacity that
    are on the stack. NOT COPY THE DATA ON THE HEAP that the pointer referes to.
  - If Rust did copy on heap, assignment could be very expensive in terms of
      runtime performance if the data on the heap were large.
- When a variable goes our of scope, Rust automatically calls the `drop`
    function and cleans up the heap memory for that variable. But `s2 = s1` is
    not that case: if nothing happens and the scope is closed, both `s1` and
    `s2` are out of scope at the same time. So they will both try to free the
    **same** memory, which is a _double free_ error which can lead to memory
    corruption, which can potentially lead to security vulnerabilities.
- To ensure memory safety, after the line `let s2 = s1;`, Rust considers `s1` as
    no longer valid. Therefore Rust doesn't need to free anything when `s1` goes
    out of scope.
```rust
let s1 = String::from("hello");
let s2 = s1;
println!("{}, world!", s1); // error: value borrowed here after move
```
- You've may heard about _shallow copy_ and _deep copy_. Concept of copying the
    pointer, length, and capacity without copying the data probably sounds like
    making a shallow copy.
  - However Rust also invalidates the first variable `s1`.
  - So we call this a _move_ instead of a _copy_.
  - With only `s2` valid, when it goes out of scope it alone will free the
      memory.
  - Additionally, Rust will never automatically create "deep" copies of the
      data. Any _automatic_ copying can be assumed to be inexpensive in terms of
      runtime performance.

## 4_4 Variables and data interacting with Clone
If we _do_ want to deeply copy the heap data of the `String` for instance, not
just the stack data, we can use `clone()` method.
```rust
let s1 = String::from("hello");
let s2 = s1.clone();
println!("s1 = {}, s2 = {}", s1, s2);
```
When you see a call to `clone`, you know that some arbitrary code is being
executed and that code may be expensive. It's a visual indicator that something
different is going on.

## 4_5 Stack-Only Data: Copy
We previously mentioned that primitive data (that are stored on stack) can be
copied (not moved).
```rust
let x = 5;
let y = x;
println!("x = {}, y = {}", x, y);
```
- Types such as integers that have a known size at compile time are stored
    _entirely_ on the stack, so copies of the actual values are quick to make.
    We have no reason to invalidate `x` after we've made the copy `y`.
  - Deep/shallow copy makes no difference, so calling `clone` wouldn't do
      anything different from just making a copy.
- Rust has a special annotation called the `Copy` **trait** that we can place on
    types that are stored on the stack. If a type implements the `Copy` trait,
    variables that use it do not move, but rather are trivially copied, making
    them still valid after assignment to another variable.
- Rust won't let us annotate a type with `Copy` if the type (or any of its
    parts) has implemented the `Drop` trait. If the type needs something special
    to happen when the value foes out of scope and we add the `Copy` annotation
    to that type, we'll get a compile time error.
  - Adding `Copy` annotation to the type to implement the trait is described in
      Appendix C.
- What types implement the `Copy`?
  - Integer types, Boolean type `bool`, floating point types, character type,
      **tuples** if they only contain types that **also** implement `Copy`.

## 4_6 Ownership and Functions
Mechanics of passing a value to a function are similar to those when assigning a
value to a variable. Passing a variable to a function will move or copy, just as
assignment does. (depending on its type).
```rust
fn main() {
    let s = String::from("hello");  // s comes into scope

    takes_ownership(s);             // s's value moves into the function...
                                    // ... and so is no longer valid here
                                    // Trying to use s after this call throws a
                                    // compile-time error.

    let x = 5;                      // x comes into scope

    makes_copy(x);                  // x would move into the function,
                                    // but i32 is Copy, so it's okay to still
                                    // use x afterward

} // Here, x goes out of scope, then s. But because s's value was moved, nothing
  // special happens.

fn takes_ownership(some_string: String) { // some_string comes into scope
    println!("{}", some_string);
} // Here, some_string goes out of scope and `drop` is called. The backing
  // memory is freed.

fn makes_copy(some_integer: i32) { // some_integer comes into scope
    println!("{}", some_integer);
} // Here, some_integer goes out of scope. Nothing special happens.
```

## 4_7 Return Values and Scope
Returning values can also transfer ownership.
```rust
fn main() {
    let s1 = gives_ownership();         // gives_ownership moves its return
                                        // value into s1

    let s2 = String::from("hello");     // s2 comes into scope

    let s3 = takes_and_gives_back(s2);  // s2 is moved into
                                        // takes_and_gives_back, which also
                                        // moves its return value into s3
} // Here, s3 goes out of scope and is dropped. s2 was moved, so nothing
  // happens. s1 goes out of scope and is dropped.

fn gives_ownership() -> String {             // gives_ownership will move its
                                             // return value into the function
                                             // that calls it

    let some_string = String::from("yours"); // some_string comes into scope

    some_string                              // some_string is returned and
                                             // moves out to the calling
                                             // function
}

// This function takes a String and returns one
fn takes_and_gives_back(a_string: String) -> String { // a_string comes into
                                                      // scope

    a_string  // a_string is returned and moves out to the calling function
}
```

- The ownership of a variable follows the same pattern every time: assigning a
    value to another variable moves it.
  - When a variable that includes data on the heap goes out of scope, the value
      will be cleaned up by `drop` unless the data has been moved to be owned by
      another variable.
- While this works, taking ownership and then returning ownership with every
    function is a bit tedious.
  - What if we want to let a function use a value but not take ownership?
```rust
fn main() {
    let s1 = String::from("hello");

    let (s2, len) = calculate_length(s1);

    println!("The length of '{}' is {}.", s2, len); // to print original s1
    // back, we had to return the original s1 from calculate_length.
}

fn calculate_length(s: String) -> (String, usize) {
    let length = s.len(); // len() returns the length of a String

    (s, length)
}
```
- The `calculate_length` function now takes ownership of a `String` and returns
    ownership of the same `String` and its length.
  - This is a bit of a roundabout way of returning multiple values, but it
      works.
  - But we don't want to do the redundant works.
- Thus Rust has _references_, that uses a value without transferring ownership.
