# 4_2 References and Borrowing

## 4_2_1 References

Previous example: had to return the `String` to the calling function because
`String` was moved to the callee.
Instead, we can provide a reference to the `String` value. A _reference_ is like
a pointer in that it's an address we can follow to access the data stored at
that address; that data is owned by some other variable.
Unlike a pointer, a reference is guaranteed to point to a valid value of a
particular type for the life of that reference.

```rust
fn main() {
    let s1 = String::from("hello");

    // `&s1` lets us create a reference that _refers_ to the value of `s1` but
    // does not own it.
    let len = calculate_length(&s1);

    println!("The length of '{}' is {}.", s1, len);
}

fn calculate_length(s: &String) -> usize { //  s is a reference to a String.
    s.len()
}// Here, s goes out of scope, but since it does not have ownership of what it
// refers to, it is not dropped.
```
`&String s` is pointing `s1` where the `s1` itself points to the `String` value
in the heap. `s`'s ptr points `s1`'s ptr.
- The opposite of referencing by using `&` is _dereferencing_, which is
    accomplished with the dereferencing operator `*`.
- If we try to modify something we're borrowing, it will give an error.

```rust
fn main () {
  let s = String::from("hello");
  change(&s);
}
fn change(some_string: &String) {
  some_string.push_str(", world"); // cannot borrow `*some_string` as mutable.
}
```

## 4_2_2 Mutable References
- Unlike the above code, the following code is valid because we use a _mutable
reference_:

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut s = String::from("hello");

    change(&mut s);
}
fn change(some_string: &mut String) { // It will mutate the value it borrows.
  some_string.push_str(", world");
}
```
- ONE BIG RESTRICTION: If you have a mutable reference to a value, you can have
    no other references(including immutable ones) to that value.
```rust
    let mut s = String::from("hello");

    let r1 = &mut s;
    let r2 = &mut s;

    println!("{}, {}", r1, r2); // this read-only usage still fails.
```
- The restriction preventing multiple mutable references to the same data at the
    same time allows for mutation but in a very controlled fashion. (Other
    languages let you mutate whenever you'd like.)
  - The benefit of having this restriction is that Rust can prevent data races
      at compile time. A _data race_ is similar to a race condition and happens
      when these three behaviors occur:
    - Two or more pointers access the same data at the same time.
    - At least one of the pointers is being used to write to the data.
    - There's no mechanism being used to sync access to the data.
- As always, we can use curly btrackets to create a new scope, allowing for
    multiple mutable references, just not _simultaneous ones_:
```rust
// Okay
let mut s = String::from("hello");
{
  let r1 = &mut s;
} // r1 goes out of scope here, so we can make a new reference with no problems.
let r2 = &mut s;
```
- Rust enforces a similar rule for combining mutable and immutable references.
  - After generating a mutable reference, you can't access to its previously
      generated immutable borrowings(references).
```rust
// Wrong
let mut s = String::from("hello");
let r1 = &s; // no problem
let r2 = &s; // no problem
let r3 = &mut s; // BIG PROBLEM
println!("{}, {}, and {}", r1, r2, r3); // Since r1 and r2 are accessed after
// generating a mutable reference r3, its immutability is violated.
```
- We _also_ cannot have a mutable reference while we have an immutable one to the
    same value.
  - Users of an immutable reference don't expect the value to suddenly change
      out from under them.
- We just allow multiple immutable references because no one who is just
    reading the data has the ability to affect anyone else's reading of the
    data.
- Note that a reference's scope starts from where it is introduced and continues
    through the **last time** that reference is used (slightly different from
    variables: which lasts until the end of the scope). Thus, the following code
    is valid.
```rust
let mut s = String::from("hello");
let r1 = &s; // no problem
let r2 = &s; // no problem
println!("{} and {}", r1, r2);
// r1 and r2 will not be used after this point.
let r3 = &mut s; // no problem
println!("{}", r3);
```
- (r1/r2) and r3 's scope don't overlap.
- Even though borrowing errors may be frustrating at times, remember that it's
    the Rust compiler pointing out a potential bug early (at compile time,
    rather than at runtime) and showing that exactly where the problem is.

## 4_2_3 Dangling References
In languages with pointers, it's easy to erroneously create a dangling pointer-
a pointer that references a location in memory that may have been given to
someone else- by freeing some memory while preserving a pointer to that memory.
- Rust, by contrast, the compiler guarantees that references will never be
    dangling references. If you have a reference to some data, the compiler will
    ensure that the data will not go out of scope before the reference to the
    data does.
```rust
fn main() {
  let ref_to_nothing = dangle();
}
fn dangle() -> &string { // <- error point: expected named lifetime parameter.
  let s = String::from("hello"); // s is a new string.
  &s // we return a reference to the String s. error: `s` does not live long enough
} // s goes out of scope and dropped. It's memory goes away.
```
- Disregarding about lifetimes, the message becomes:
  - This function's return type contains a borrowed value, but there is no value
      for it to be borrowed from.
- Instead of returning reference, just return the `String` directly now.
```rust
fn no_dangle() -> String {
  let s = String::from("hello");
  s
}
```

## 4_2_4 The Rules of References
- At any given time, you can have _either_ one mutable reference _or_ any number
    of immutable references.
- References must always be valid.
