# 3_1 Variables and Mutability

## 3_1_1 Variables

Variables are immutable. Rust gives you to write the code in a way that takes
advantage of the safety and easy concurrency that Rust provides.
Still you have option to make variables mutable (`mut`).

When a variable is immutable, once a value is bound to a name, that value cannot
be changed. For example:

```rust
fn main() {
    let x = 5;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
    x = 6; // Error: Cannot assign twice to immutable variable
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}
```

We got compile-time errors on that line, which prevents a case: one part of the
code operates on the assumption that a value will never change; another part of
the code changes that value => First part of the code won't do what it was
designed to do. This is a bug that can be difficult to track down, especially
when the second piece of code changes the value only _sometimes_. Rust compiler
guarantees that when you state that a value won't change, it really won't change.

Still mutability can be very useful and can make code more convenient to write.
Add `mut` in front of the variable name. Adding `mut` also conveys intent to
future readers of the code by indicating that other parts of the code will be
changing this variable's value.
`let x = 5 -> let mut x = 5`

### 3_1_2 Constants

Like immutable variables, constants (`const`) are values that are bound to a name and are
not allowed to change, but there are a few differences between constants and
variables.

1. You can't use `mut` with constants. Constants aren't just immutable by
   default—they're always immutable.
  - Use `const` instead of `let` and the value must be annotated with type.
2. Constants can be declared in any scope, including the global scope, which
   makes them useful for values that many part of code need to know about.
3. Constants may be set only to a constant expression, not the result of a value
   that could only be computed at runtime.
  - `const THREE_HOURS: u32 = 3 * 60 * 60;` is valid, and it increases
      readability. See [Rust Reference's section on constant evaluation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/const_eval.html)
4. Naming convention: UPPERCASE_WITH_UNDERSCORES_BETWEEN_WORDS.

Constants are valid for the entire time a program runs within the scope.
Naming hardcoded values used throughout your program as constants is useful in
conveying the meaning of that value to future maintainers of the code.
Also, changing the value of constants makes it easier than changing all code
points with that value.

### 3_1_3 Shadowing

You can declare a new variable with the same name as a previous variable. In
that case, the first variable is _shadowed_ by the second, which means that the
second variable overshadows the first, taking any uses of the variable name to
itself until either it itself is shadowed or the scope ends.

```rust
fn main() {
    let x = 5;
    let x = x + 1;
    {
        let x = x * 2; // 12
        println!("The value of x in inner scope is: {x}");
    }
    println!("The value of x in outer scope is: {x}"); // 6
}
```

Shadowing is different from marking a variable as `mut` because we'll get a
compile timne error if we accidentally try to reassign to this (non-`mut`) variable without using the `let` keyword.
By using `let` we can perform a few transformations on a value but have the
variable be immutable after those transformation have been completed.

The other difference between `mut` and shadowing is: we can change the type of
the value but reuse the same name.
```rust
let spaces = "   ";
let spaces = spaces.len(); // works
```
```rust
let mut spaces = "   ";
spaces = spaces.len(); // Error: mismatched types
```
