# 3_2 Data Types

Keep in mind that Rust is a _statically typed_ language, which means that it
must know the types of all variables at compile time.
The compiler can usually infer what type we want to use based on the value and
how we use it.
In cases when many types are possible, we must add a type annotation.
```rust
let guess: u32 = "42".parse().expect("Not a number!");
```

## 3_2_1 Scalar Types

A _scalar_ type represents a single value. Integers, Floating point numbers,
Booleans, and characters.

### Integer Types
`i8, i16, ..., i128, isize (architecture-variable)` (signed)
`u8, u16, ..., u128, usize (architecture-variable)` (unsigned)

Integer literals:
- Allows a type suffix such as `57u8`
- Can use `_` as visual separator to make numbers easier to read: `1_000`
- Decimal, Hex(`0x`), Octal(`0o`), Binary(`0b`), Byte(`u8`): b'A'

### Integer Overflow
In the case that integer overflow occurs, Rust program behaves differently
between debug and release modes. In debug mode, Rust will panic and exit the
program, but in release mode, rust performs two's complement wrapping. The
program won't panic, but the variable will have a value that probably not the
value we expected. Relying on integer overflow's wrapping behavior is considered
an error.
To explicitly handle the possibility of overflow, use standard library:
- Wrap in all modes with the wrapping_* methods, such as `wrapping_add`
- Return the `None` value if there is overflow with the `checked_*` methods
- Return the value and a boolean indicating whether there waws overflow with the
    `overflowing_*` methods
- Saturate at the value's minimum/maximum values with the `saturating_*` methods

### Floating-Point types
`f32` and `f64` (Default if `f64` because modern CPU's architecture is 64-bit.)
- Without type annotation, a floating-point literal becomes `f64`.

### Numeric Operations
- +, -, *, /, %.
- Between integers, `/` truncates toward zero to the nearest integer.

### Character Type

The language's most primitive alphabetic type.
```rust
fn main() {
    let c = 'z';
    let z: char = 'ℤ'; // with explicit type annotation
    let heart_eyed_cat = '😻';
}
```
Note that we specify `char` literals with single quotes. Double quotes are for
string literals.
`char` type is 4 bytes and represents a Unicode Scalar Value: Accented letters;
Chinese; Japanese; Korean; emoji; etc, and zero-width spaces, ...
Unicode ranges from U+0000 to U+D7FF and U+E000 to U+10FFFF Inclusive. However,
a `character` isn't really a concept in unicode. Storing UTF-8 encoded text with
strings chapter will address this.

## 3_2_2 Compound Types

_Compound Types_ can group multiple values into one type. Tuples and Arrays.

### Tuple Type

A _tuple_ is a general wayof grouping together a number of values with a variety
of types into one compound type. Tuples have a fixed length: once declared, they
cannot grow or shrink insize.
Ex)
```rust
fn main() {
    let tup: (i32, f64, u8) = (500, 6.4, 1);
}
```
`tup` binds to the entire tuple because a tuple is considered a single compount
element.
```rust
fn main() {
    let tup = (500, 6.4, 1);
    let (x, y, z) = tup;
    println!("The value of y is: {}", y);
}
```
Rust serves destructuring with pattern matching.
```rust
fn main() {
    let x: (i32, f64, u8) = (500, 6.4, 1);

    let five_hundred = x.0;

    let six_point_four = x.1;

    let one = x.2;
}
```
We can access a tuple element directly by using a period (.) followed by the
index.
```rust
fn main() {
    let x = ();
}
```
`()` is a unit type, which is a type with no values. This value and its
corresponding type are both written in `()` and represent an empty value or
empty return type. Expressions implicitly return the unit value if they don't
return any other value.

### Array Type
Another way to have a collection of multiple values is with an _array_. Unlike
a tuple, every element of an array must have the same type. Arrays in Rust are
different from arrays in some other languages because arrays in Rust have a
fixed length, like tuples.
```rust
fn main() {
    let a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
}
```
Arrays are useful when you want your data allocated on the stack (OS's) rather
than the heap (OS's), or when you want to ensure you always have a fixed number
of elements.
Array isn't as flexible as a vector type though.
A _vector_ is a similar collection type provided by the standard library that
_is_ allowed to grow or shrink in size. (Chapter 8)

Arrays are more useful when you know the number of elements will not need to
change. Array's length can be annotated with type annotation.
```rust
fn main() {
    let a: [i32; 5] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
}
```
You can also initialize an array to contain the same value for each element.
```rust
fn main() {
    let a = [3; 5]; // More concise than let a = [3, 3, 3, 3, 3];
}
```

#### Accessing array elements
Use bracket with index `A[i]`.

#### Invalid array element access
If you try to access an element using an index value that is greater than or
equal to the array length, the program will panic and exit.
Ex)
```bash
thread 'main' panicked at 'index out of bounds: the len is 5 but the index is 5', src/main.rs:2:5
note: run with `RUST_BACKTRACE=1` environment variable to display a backtrace
```
The program resulted in a _runtime_ error. Rust has many _compile-time_ checks
to ensure your program is correct, but when your code might fail for reasons
that are outside of the programmer's control, such as when trying to access an
element of an array using an index that is out of bounds, you need to add
_checking_ to your code to handle these cases. This is called _defensive
programming_ and is a common practice in many programming languages.

This is an example of Rust's memory safety principles in action. In many
low-level languages, this kind of check is not done, and trying to access
incorrect index will result in accessing invalid memory. Rust protects you
against this kind of error by immediately exiting instead of allowing the memory
access and continuing. See Chapter 9.
