# 3_3 Functions

## 3_3_1 Functions
- How to declare: `fn`
- How to name: `snake_case`
- How to define: `fn name(arguments) -> return_type { body }`
- How to call: `name(arguments)`

    fn main() {
        println!("Hello, world!");
        another_function();
    }
    fn another_function() {
        println!("Another function.");
    }

## 3_3_2 Parameters
When a function has parameters, you cna provide it with concrete values
(technically called _arguments_) for those parameters. People tend to use
_parameter_ and _argument_ interchangeably for either the variables in a
function's definition or the concrete values passed in when calling a function.
- How to declare parameters: `fn name(parameter: type) -> return_type { body }`
  - _must_ declare the type of each parameter.


## 3_3_3 Statements and Expressions
Function bodies are made up of a series of statements optionally ending in an
expression.
Expression is considered as a part of a statement.
- Rust is an expression-based language.
- **Statements** are instructions that perform some action and do not return a
  value.
  **Expressions** evaluate to a resulting value.
- example

    fn main() {
        let y = {
            let x = 3;
            x + 1
        };
        println!("The value of y is: {}", y);
    }
  - Creating a variable and assigning a value to it with `let` is a statement.
  - Function definitions are also statements.
  - Statements do not return values; thus you can't assign a `let` statement to
      another variable. (`let y = (let x = 6);` is invalid)
  - Expressions evaluate to a value and make up most of the rest of the code
      that you'll write in Rust.
  - Calling a function is an expression.
  - Calling a macro is an expression.
  - A new scope block create with curly brackets is an expression.
    - In the above example, note that `x + 1` doesn't have a semicolon at the end.
    - Expressions to not include ending semicolons.
    - Adding semicolons to the end of an expression turns it into a statement,
        which will then not return a value.

## 3_3_4 Functions with Return Values
- How to write signature that returns values: `fn name(parameter: type) -> return_type { body }`
- Return value of the function is synonymous with the value of the final
    `expression` in the block of the body of a function.
  - You can use `return value;` to return a value early from a function.
  - Implicitly, most functions return the last expression.

      fn five() -> i32 {
          5
      }
      fn main() {
        let x = five();
        println!("The value of x is: {}", x);
        let y = plus_one(x);
        println!("The value of y is: {}", y);
      }
      fn plus_one(x: i32) -> i32 {
          x + 1 // Not `x + 1;`.
      }

  - The above code is valid.
