# 3_5 Control Flow

## 3_5_1 `if`

`if` is a conditional statement that executes a block of code if a condition is true.
You can extend the `if` statement with `else` and `else if` to execute different blocks of code depending on the condition.

```rust
fn main () {
    let number = 3;
    if number < 5 {
        // true block
        println!("condition was true");
    } else {
        // false block
        println!("condition was false");
    }
}
```

- Condition must be evaluated as a `bool` type.
  - If the condition isn't a bool, the compiler will throw an error.
  - Unlike other languages such as Ruby/JS/C++, Rust will not automatically try
      to convert non-Boolean types to a Boolean.
  - Must be explicit, always provide if with a Boolean.

## 3_5_2 `else if`

- To handle multiple conditions, use `else if` instead of `else { if`.
- Using too many `else if` expressions can clutter the code. These codes
    requires refactoring.
  - Chapter 6 wil cover a powerful Rust branching construct: `match`.

## 3_5_3 `if` in a `let` statement
- Since `if` is an expression, we can use it on the right side of a let
    statement to assign the outcome to a variable.

    fn main() {
        let condition = true;
        let number = if condition { 5 } else { 6 }; // 5. if 6 -> "six", error.
        println!("The value of number is: {}", number);
    }
  - The `number` variable here will be bound to a value based on the outcome of
      the `if` expression.
- Remember that block of code evaluate to the last expression. Thus, each arm of
    the if must be the same type.

## 3_5_4 Repetition with Loops
- `loop`, `while`, `for`.

### 3_5_4_1 `loop`
- `loop` is a loop that runs until you explicitly tell it to stop.

    fn main() {
        loop {
            println!("again!"); // Will not stop forever.
        }
    }
- Rust provides a way to break out of a loop using code. Use `break` keyword.
  - `continue` keyword tells the program to skip over any remaining code in its
      iteration of the loop and go to the next iteration.

#### 3_5_4_2 Returning Values from Loops
- `loop` can return a value using `break` keyword.
```rust
    fn main() {
        let mut counter = 0;
        let result = loop {
            counter += 1;
            if counter == 10 {
                break counter * 2;
            }
        };
        println!("The result is {}", result);
    }
```
  - The `break` keyword takes a value that will be returned from the loop.
  - The `result` variable will be bound to the value that was passed to the
      `break` expression.

#### 3_5_4_3 Loop Labels to Disambiguate Between Multiple Loops
- You can use a label to break out of a loop from a nested loop.
```rust
    fn main() {
        let mut counter = 0;
        'outer: loop {
            println!("Entered the outer loop");
            'inner: loop {
                println!("Entered the inner loop");
                counter += 1;
                if counter == 5 {
                    break 'inner;
                }
                if counter == 10 {
                    break 'outer;
                }
            }
            println!("Exited the inner loop");
        }
        println!("Exited the outer loop");
    }
```
  - The `break` expression is followed by a label, `'outer` in this case.
  - The `break` expression will break out of the loop with the label `'inner`
      first.
  - The `break` expression will break out of the loop with the label `'outer`.

### 3_5_5 Conditional Loops with `while`
- `while` loop is a conditional loop that runs while a condition is true.
```rust
    fn main() {
        let mut number = 3;
        while number != 0 {
            println!("{}!", number);
            number -= 1;
        }
        println!("LIFTOFF!!!");
    }
```
  - The `while` loop is similar to `if` in that it is an expression.
  - The `while` loop is different from `if` in that it evaluates the condition
      before executing the loop body.

### 3_5_6 Looping Through a Collection with for
- You can choose to use `while` construct to lop over the elements of a
collection, such as an array.
```rust
fn main() {
    let a = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50];
    let mut index = 0;

    while index < 5 {
        println!("the value is: {}", a[index]);

        index += 1;
    }
}
```
- This approach is error prone; We could cause a program to panic with OOB or
    test condition incorrectness.
  - Example: If we change the size of array to 4 but forget to change the
      condition to `index < 4`, the program will panic.

- Rust provides a more concise way to loop through a collection: `for` loop.
```rust
fn main() {
    let a = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50];

    for element in a {
        println!("the value is: {}", element);
    }
}
```
  - `for` loop is an expression that takes a collection and iterates over each
      element.
  - `iter()` method on the array that returns each element in a collection.
  - `iter()` returns each element by value.
  - `iter_mut()` returns each element by mutable reference.
  - `into_iter()` returns each element by value and takes ownership of the
      collection.
  - `for` loop is more concise and less error prone than `while` loop.

### 3_5_6 Summary
- variables, scalar/compound types, functions, comments, `if`, loops.
- Convert temperatures betwen Fahrenheit and Celsius.
- Generate _n_ th Fibonacci number.
- Print "The Twelve Days of Christmas" song.
